src/content/post/my-design-philosophy.md, before:

---
title: "My design philosophy"
description: "The thinking that has had the biggest impact on me throughout my career."
publishDate: "1 Oct 2023"
tags: ["web", "design", "dev", "philosophy"]
draft: true
---

Recently I've been thinking about my design philosophy. It might sound grandiose at first, but I believe we all have one, whether it is consciously constructed and employed or not. I asked myself the following questions to unpack my design philosophy.

What are the fundamental beliefs and approaches that inform my practice? What have I taken with me from job to job, or even across crafts — from being a designer, to a 'design technologist', to a software engineer? What pieces of writing or talks do I return to time after time, or frequently share with my peers? What ideals were embraced by the most successful and enjoyable projects I've worked on? What was _missing_ in the most frustrating projects I've worked on?

You could ask yourself similar questions if you wanted to interrogate your own philosophy.

## Understand your medium

- Dao of web
- Frank

## Development is design

- Brad Frost
- get to the browser as soon as possible

## Make space to jam and just vibe

- design is a team sport
- Embodied cognition
- have fun

Commit message:

wip design philosophy post
Gonna reduce and punch this out, commit here if I ever want the record of half baked thoughts

src/content/post/my-design-philosophy.md, after:

---
title: "My design philosophy"
description: "How I like to build for the web"
publishDate: "6 Oct 2023"
tags: ["web", "design", "dev", "philosophy"]
draft: true
---

Recently I've been thinking about my design philosophy.

It might sound grandiose at first, but I believe we all have one, whether it is consciously constructed and employed or not. These philosophies influence how we plan and execute our own work, but also how we collaborate with others. When you have strong philosophical alignment with your team mates, building things together can feel almost effortless and it's very fun. On the other hand, deep philosophical differences between collaborators makes it difficult to get into a flow together. I think it's a good thing to be aware of the foundational beliefs you hold close in your own practice, so you can have fruitful conversations, set expectations, learn from others, teach others, and ideally get to that happy place where everyone is harmonising and enjoying the journey together.

Four years ago I did a talk at Sydney's Design System Meetup called "One foot in both camps" where I shared my experience navigating a career as a design/dev hybrid, some thoughts on what makes a healthy team, and how we should think about the role of engineering in the design process. You can [view it on Vimeo](https://vimeo.com/358956867) if you like.

I found it encouraging to watch it back and realise that while many things have changed — I'm rocking a shaved head now instead of that long flowing hair, for one thing — there are some things that have proven to be true time and time again throughout my career.

Here are a few pillars of my design philosophy:

## Understand your medium

To re-use a tortured analogy, imagine being an architect or a builder and having very little idea about the physical materials and tools you are trying to use to design and build your projects. It's preposterous to think you could get very far in your career.

You can't design well for the web without at least trying to understand it. Of course, no-one ever attains complete mastery over all there is to possibly know about building for the web — the landscape is constantly moving and evolving — but you must attempt

## Development is design

## Make space to jam and just vibe

- design is a team sport
- Embodied cognition
- have fun

## Recommended reading list

- Dao of Web
- Grain of the Web
- Atomic Design
